---
permalink: /projects/
title: " "
excerpt: " "
---
## Ongoing projects

### Narrowing precipitation uncertainty over High Mountain Asia

2021 -

High Mountain Asia supplies freshwater to over one billion people via Asia's largest rivers. In this area, rain and snowfall are the main drivers of river flow. However, the spatiotemporal distribution of precipitation is still poorly understood due to limited direct measurements from weather stations. Existing tools to fill in missing data or improve the resolution of coarser precipitation products produce biased results. We propose a method to generate more accurate high-resolution precipitation predictions over areas with sparse in situ data, called Multi-Fidelity Gaussian Processes (MFGPs). MFGP can combine multiple precipitation sources to increase the accuracy of precipitation estimates while providing principled uncertainties. This method can also make predictions in ungauged locations, away from the high-fidelity training distribution. Finally, MFGPs are simpler to implement and more applicable to small datasets than state-of-the-art machine learning models.

📹 [Morroco AI Webinar](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sPsKBK3ORXE) \
📄 [Preprint](https://egusphere.copernicus.org/preprints/2023/egusphere-2023-2145/)

### Beyond intuition, a framework for applying GPs to real-word data

2023 -

Gaussian Processes (GPs) offer an attractive method for regression over small, structured and correlated datasets. However, their deployment is hindered by computational costs and limited guidelines on how to apply GPs beyond simple low-dimensional datasets. We propose a framework to identify the suitability of GPs to a given problem and how to set up a robust and well-specified GP model. The guidelines formalise the decisions of experienced GP practitioners, with an emphasis on kernel design and options for computational scalability. The framework is then applied to a case study of glacier elevation change yielding more accurate results at test time.

🔗 [Website](https://kenzaxtazi.github.io/realworldgp/) \
📄 [Beyond intuition, a framework for applying GPs to real-word data](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.03093)

### Predicting precipitation in the Upper Indus Basin using Gaussian Processes

2022 -

The Upper Indus Basin, Himalayas provides water for 270 million people and countless ecosystems. However, precipitation, a key component to hydrological modelling, is poorly understood in this area. A key challenge surrounding this uncertainty comes from the complex spatial-temporal distribution of precipitation across the basin. In this project, we propose Gaussian processes kernels to overcome these challenges.

📄 [Kernel learning for explainable climate science](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.04947)

### BCM4RCM: Bayesian Committee Machines for Regional Climate Models

2023 -

This work applies an ensembling method to combine different regional climate model outputs and produces principled uncertainty estimates of precipitation under different climate scenarios. These estimates inform the likelihood of extreme events that could lead to flooding, landslides, or droughts. More specifically, Gaussian Processes are fit to the projections of Coordinated Regional Downscaling Experiment (CORDEX) members for South Asia. A Gaussian Process is a probabilistic and interpretable machine learning method that gives principled uncertainty estimates. The models are then combined using a Bayesian Committee Machine. This method allows modellers to overcome the computational complexity of Gaussian Processes, thus improving scalability while conserving the benefits of Gaussian Process models.

🔗 [AGU23 abstract](https://eur03.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fcam.us19.list-manage.com%2Ftrack%2Fclick%3Fu%3D419af8f3d81cb9d44999cdbb1%26id%3Dcd448e4e2c%26e%3D8d95ccd487&data=05%7C01%7Ckt484%40universityofcambridgecloud.onmicrosoft.com%7C7e0dc7be1cca471accc808dbef404662%7C49a50445bdfa4b79ade3547b4f3986e9%7C1%7C0%7C638366831624928497%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C3000%7C%7C%7C&sdata=135mJ4SAdyH1Ti9OYRC4sar42kkzu%2FjVHGCrnWwUcKk%3D&reserved=0)

## Upcoming projects

### High Mountain Data Working Group

2024 -

I will co-lead the Himalayan University Consortium Working Group on 'High Mountain Data' alongside Jakob Steiner and Himani Upaddhyay. More details soon!

## Previous projects

### Pyrocast, a machine learning framework for forcasting pyroCb

2022

Pyrocumulonimbus (pyroCb) clouds are storm clouds generated by extreme wildfires. PyroCbs are associated with unpredictable, and therefore dangerous, wildfire spread. They can also inject smoke particles and trace gases into the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere, affecting the Earth's climate. As global temperatures increase, these previously rare events are becoming more common. Being able to predict which fires are likely to generate pyroCb is therefore key to climate adaptation in wildfire-prone areas. Pyrocast is a pipeline for pyroCb analysis and forecasting and understanding the causal drivers pyroCb events. This pipeline aims to help scientists research pyroCb and to help policymakers and local authorities efficiently allocate resources and evacuate residents and emergency responders.

📄 [Pyrocast, a machine learning framework for forcasting pyroCb](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13052) \
📄 [Identifying the causes of pyrocumulonimbus](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2211.08883)

### Cambridgeshire Decarbonisation Fund

2020-2021

Our team of postdoctoral and PhD students proposed the Cambridgeshire Decarbonisation Fund to support the achievement of Net-Zero Cambridgeshire by 2050. We identify ways in which Cambridgeshire businesses can invest locally in community infrastructure and nature-based projects that reduce carbon emissions at their source or actively sequester carbon. This investment will support earlier reductions to carbon emissions than might otherwise occur, provide added value to the places we live, and the people that live and work here, whilst also benefiting businesses as part of their wider carbon emissions, environmental, social and governance commitments.

📄 [Cambridgeshire Decarbonisation Fund White paper](<https://data.cambridgeshireinsight.org.uk/dataset/cambridgeshire-policy-challenges-cambridge-university-science-and-policy-exchange-cuspe-20>)

### cloud-id, cloud identification over polar regions

<details>
<summary>2018-2019</summary>
<br>

We developed a neural network (NN) to identify clouds over polar regions using satellite data from the Sentinel 3 SLSTR instrument. The network was trained using the CALIPSO satellite data as ground truth. The model improved classification accuracy by over 30% compared to the contemporary state-of-the art cloud mask methods over both the Arctic and Antarctic. The key improvement came from better identification of clear scenes; for the NN mask, the same performance in terms of contamination of cloudy pixels in the sample of identified clear pixels can be achieved while retaining 40% of the clear pixels compared with 10% for the operational cloud identification. The model was also shown to work on out-of-distribution domains, such as the tropics.

📄 [Evaluation and comparison of a machine learning cloud identification algorithm for the SLSTR in polar regions](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0034425720303692)

</details>
